# Reducing Heat losses in swimming pools

## Background and motivation

Open swimming pools get naturally heated by absorbing solar energy directly from the sun. Majority of the solar radiation striking the swimming pool surface is absorbed by the water and converted into heat [1]. However, due to their vast surface area, heat losses to the surroundings are relatively high, and swimming pools maintain their average temperature relatively close to the average surrounding air temperature. As a result, during cooler months when the temperature outside is too low, heaters are used to heat the pool water to bring it to one’s desired temperature, which results in a substantial amount of electricity consumption.
The simplest suggested solution to this high heat loss issue to increase water temperature is an introduction of a transparent plastic cover that will allow solar radiation to pass through [2]. Plastic also meets the requirements of being a vapor barrier. Accordingly, the objective of this project is to design and analyze a transparent swimming pool cover that will address the aforementioned issues and should significantly reduce pool heating costs.
Heat loss from a swimming pool mainly occur through evaporation (ignored in this report), convection, radiation, and some negligible conduction to the ground. In order to retain the water at a higher temperature than that of the surrounding air, the amount of heat to be supplied to the water must be equal to the heat loss at this temperature. The water temperature will increase by keeping the heat input unchanged and reducing this heat loss [1]. With the introduction of a transparent cover, there will also be an introduction of heat loss due to reflection of the interfaces between the sun and the water. A pool cover will also decrease the solar gain contribution to some extent.
This project aims to analyse ad compare the heat losses from an open swimming pool with and without the incorporation of a transparent cover and see how much money can be saved through utilising a cover. Quite a few assumptions are introduced in the calculations, therefore the final calculated values may not be ideal or extremely accurate, however, it will still provide an insight to the suggested solution.
This project has used the weather dataset for Montreal from the months of March-May, and took advantage of MATLAB to calculate the hourly and total forced and natural convection heat transfer coefficients, corresponding resistances, reflection losses, and the Q values for convection, radiation and combined values for both with and without the presence of a sheet, all of which are presented and discussed in the following pages.

